docs/topics/testing.rst, before:

Testing
=======

Testing Channels consumers is a little trickier than testing normal Django
views due to their underlying asynchronous nature.

To help with testing, Channels provides test helpers called *Communicators*,
which allow you to wrap up an ASGI application (like a consumer) into its own
event loop and ask it questions.

`You can test asynchronous code
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#testing-
asynchronous-code>`_ using Django's ``TestCase``. Alternately, you can use
``pytest`` with its
`pytest-asyncio <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-asyncio>`_ plugin.


Setting Up Async Tests
----------------------

To use Django's ``TestCase`` you simply define an ``async def`` test method in
order to provide the appropriate async context::

    from django.test import TestCase
    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    from myproject.myapp.consumers import MyConsumer

    class MyTests(TestCase):
        async def test_my_consumer(self):
            communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")
            response = await communicator.get_response()
            self.assertEqual(response["body"], b"test response")
            self.assertEqual(response["status"], 200)

To use ``pytest`` you need to set it up with async test support, and
presumably Django test support as well. You can do this by installing the
``pytest-django`` and ``pytest-asyncio`` packages:

.. code-block:: sh

    python -m pip install -U pytest-django pytest-asyncio

Then, you need to decorate the tests you want to run async with
``pytest.mark.asyncio``. Note that you can't mix this with ``unittest.TestCase``
subclasses; you have to write async tests as top-level test functions in the
native ``pytest`` style:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    from myproject.myapp.consumers import MyConsumer

    @pytest.mark.asyncio
    async def test_my_consumer():
        communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")
        response = await communicator.get_response()
        assert response["body"] == b"test response"
        assert response["status"] == 200

There's a few variants of the Communicator - a plain one for generic usage,
and one each for HTTP and WebSockets specifically that have shortcut methods,


ApplicationCommunicator
-----------------------

``ApplicationCommunicator`` is the generic test helper for any ASGI application.
It provides several basic methods for interaction as explained below.

You should only need this generic class for non-HTTP/WebSocket tests, though
you might need to fall back to it if you are testing things like HTTP chunked
responses or long-polling, which aren't supported in ``HttpCommunicator`` yet.

.. note::
    ``ApplicationCommunicator`` is actually provided by the base ``asgiref``
    package, but we let you import it from ``channels.testing`` for convenience.

To construct it, pass it an application and a scope:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import ApplicationCommunicator
    communicator = ApplicationCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), {"type": "http", ...})

send_input
~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to send an event to the application:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_input({
        "type": "http.request",
        "body": b"chunk one \x01 chunk two",
    })

receive_output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to receive an event from the application:

.. code-block:: python

    event = await communicator.receive_output(timeout=1)
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.start"

.. _application_communicator-receive_nothing:

receive_nothing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to check that there is no event waiting to be received from the
application:

.. code-block:: python

    assert await communicator.receive_nothing(timeout=0.1, interval=0.01) is False
    # Receive the rest of the http request from above
    event = await communicator.receive_output()
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.body"
    assert event.get("more_body") is True
    event = await communicator.receive_output()
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.body"
    assert event.get("more_body") is None
    # Check that there isn't another event
    assert await communicator.receive_nothing() is True
    # You could continue to send and receive events
    # await communicator.send_input(...)

The method has two optional parameters:

* ``timeout``: number of seconds to wait to ensure the queue is empty. Defaults
  to 0.1.
* ``interval``: number of seconds to wait for another check for new events.
  Defaults to 0.01.

wait
~~~~

Call it to wait for an application to exit (you'll need to either do this or wait for
it to send you output before you can see what it did using mocks or inspection):

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.wait(timeout=1)

If you're expecting your application to raise an exception, use ``pytest.raises``
around ``wait``:

.. code-block:: python

    with pytest.raises(ValueError):
        await communicator.wait()


HttpCommunicator
----------------

``HttpCommunicator`` is a subclass of ``ApplicationCommunicator`` specifically
tailored for HTTP requests. You need only instantiate it with your desired
options:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyHttpConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")

And then wait for its response:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.get_response()
    assert response["body"] == b"test response"

You can pass the following arguments to the constructor:

* ``method``: HTTP method name (unicode string, required)
* ``path``: HTTP path (unicode string, required)
* ``body``: HTTP body (bytestring, optional)

The response from the ``get_response`` method will be a dict with the following
keys:

* ``status``: HTTP status code (integer)
* ``headers``: List of headers as (name, value) tuples (both bytestrings)
* ``body``: HTTP response body (bytestring)


WebsocketCommunicator
---------------------

``WebsocketCommunicator`` allows you to more easily test WebSocket consumers.
It provides several convenience methods for interacting with a WebSocket
application, as shown in this example:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import WebsocketCommunicator
    communicator = WebsocketCommunicator(SimpleWebsocketApp.as_asgi(), "/testws/")
    connected, subprotocol = await communicator.connect()
    assert connected
    # Test sending text
    await communicator.send_to(text_data="hello")
    response = await communicator.receive_from()
    assert response == "hello"
    # Close
    await communicator.disconnect()

.. note::

    All of these methods are coroutines, which means you must ``await`` them.
    If you do not, your test will either time out (if you forgot to await a
    send) or try comparing things to a coroutine object (if you forgot to
    await a receive).

.. important::

    If you don't call ``WebsocketCommunicator.disconnect()`` before your test
    suite ends, you may find yourself getting ``RuntimeWarnings`` about
    things never being awaited, as you will be killing your app off in the
    middle of its lifecycle. You do not, however, have to ``disconnect()`` if
    your app already raised an error.

You can also pass an ``application`` built with ``URLRouter`` instead of the
plain consumer class. This lets you test applications that require positional
or keyword arguments in the ``scope``:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import WebsocketCommunicator
    application = URLRouter([
        path("testws/<message>/", KwargsWebSocketApp.as_asgi()),
    ])
    communicator = WebsocketCommunicator(application, "/testws/test/")
    connected, subprotocol = await communicator.connect()
    assert connected
    # Test on connection welcome message
    message = await communicator.receive_from()
    assert message == 'test'
    # Close
    await communicator.disconnect()

.. note::

    Since the ``WebsocketCommunicator`` class takes a URL in its constructor,
    a single Communicator can only test a single URL. If you want to test
    multiple different URLs, use multiple Communicators.

connect
~~~~~~~

Triggers the connection phase of the WebSocket and waits for the application
to either accept or deny the connection. Takes no parameters and returns
either:

* ``(True, <chosen_subprotocol>)`` if the socket was accepted.
  ``chosen_subprotocol`` defaults to ``None``.
* ``(False, <close_code>)`` if the socket was rejected.
  ``close_code`` defaults to ``1000``.

send_to
~~~~~~~

Sends a data frame to the application. Takes exactly one of ``bytes_data``
or ``text_data`` as parameters, and returns nothing:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_to(bytes_data=b"hi\0")

This method will type-check your parameters for you to ensure what you are
sending really is text or bytes.

send_json_to
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sends a JSON payload to the application as a text frame. Call it with
an object and it will JSON-encode it for you, and return nothing:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_json_to({"hello": "world"})

receive_from
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Receives a frame from the application and gives you either ``bytes`` or
``text`` back depending on the frame type:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.receive_from()

Takes an optional ``timeout`` argument with a number of seconds to wait before
timing out, which defaults to 1. It will typecheck your application's responses
for you as well, to ensure that text frames contain text data, and binary
frames contain binary data.

receive_json_from
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Receives a text frame from the application and decodes it for you:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.receive_json_from()
    assert response == {"hello": "world"}

Takes an optional ``timeout`` argument with a number of seconds to wait before
timing out, which defaults to 1.

receive_nothing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Checks that there is no frame waiting to be received from the application. For
details see
:ref:`ApplicationCommunicator <application_communicator-receive_nothing>`.

disconnect
~~~~~~~~~~

Closes the socket from the client side. Takes nothing and returns nothing.

You do not need to call this if the application instance you're testing already
exited (for example, if it errored), but if you do call it, it will just
silently return control to you.


ChannelsLiveServerTestCase
--------------------------

If you just want to run standard Selenium or other tests that require a
webserver to be running for external programs, you can use
``ChannelsLiveServerTestCase``, which is a drop-in replacement for the
standard Django ``LiveServerTestCase``:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import ChannelsLiveServerTestCase

    class SomeLiveTests(ChannelsLiveServerTestCase):

        def test_live_stuff(self):
            call_external_testing_thing(self.live_server_url)

.. note::

    You can't use an in-memory database for your live tests. Therefore
    include a test database file name in your settings to tell Django to
    use a file database if you use SQLite:

    .. code-block:: python

        DATABASES = {
            "default": {
                "ENGINE": "django.db.backends.sqlite3",
                "NAME": os.path.join(BASE_DIR, "db.sqlite3"),
                "TEST": {
                    "NAME": os.path.join(BASE_DIR, "db_test.sqlite3"),
                },
            },
        }

serve_static
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Subclass ``ChannelsLiveServerTestCase`` with ``serve_static = True`` in order
to serve static files (comparable to Django's ``StaticLiveServerTestCase``, you
don't need to run collectstatic before or as a part of your tests setup).

Commit message:

Don't actually close DB connections during tests (#2101)

docs/topics/testing.rst, after:

Testing
=======

Testing Channels consumers is a little trickier than testing normal Django
views due to their underlying asynchronous nature.

To help with testing, Channels provides test helpers called *Communicators*,
which allow you to wrap up an ASGI application (like a consumer) into its own
event loop and ask it questions.

`You can test asynchronous code
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/testing/tools/#testing-
asynchronous-code>`_ using Django's ``TestCase``. Alternately, you can use
``pytest`` with its
`pytest-asyncio <https://github.com/pytest-dev/pytest-asyncio>`_ plugin.


Setting Up Async Tests
----------------------

To use Django's ``TestCase`` you simply define an ``async def`` test method in
order to provide the appropriate async context::

    from django.test import TestCase
    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    from myproject.myapp.consumers import MyConsumer

    class MyTests(TestCase):
        async def test_my_consumer(self):
            communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")
            response = await communicator.get_response()
            self.assertEqual(response["body"], b"test response")
            self.assertEqual(response["status"], 200)

To use ``pytest`` you need to set it up with async test support, and
presumably Django test support as well. You can do this by installing the
``pytest-django`` and ``pytest-asyncio`` packages:

.. code-block:: sh

    python -m pip install -U pytest-django pytest-asyncio

Then, you need to decorate the tests you want to run async with
``pytest.mark.asyncio``. Note that you can't mix this with ``unittest.TestCase``
subclasses; you have to write async tests as top-level test functions in the
native ``pytest`` style:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest
    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    from myproject.myapp.consumers import MyConsumer

    @pytest.mark.asyncio
    async def test_my_consumer():
        communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")
        response = await communicator.get_response()
        assert response["body"] == b"test response"
        assert response["status"] == 200

There's a few variants of the Communicator - a plain one for generic usage,
and one each for HTTP and WebSockets specifically that have shortcut methods,


ApplicationCommunicator
-----------------------

``ApplicationCommunicator`` is the generic test helper for any ASGI application.
It provides several basic methods for interaction as explained below.

You should only need this generic class for non-HTTP/WebSocket tests, though
you might need to fall back to it if you are testing things like HTTP chunked
responses or long-polling, which aren't supported in ``HttpCommunicator`` yet.

.. note::
    ``ApplicationCommunicator`` extends the class provided by the base ``asgiref``
    package. Channels adds support for running unit tests with async consumers.

To construct it, pass it an application and a scope:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import ApplicationCommunicator
    communicator = ApplicationCommunicator(MyConsumer.as_asgi(), {"type": "http", ...})

send_input
~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to send an event to the application:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_input({
        "type": "http.request",
        "body": b"chunk one \x01 chunk two",
    })

receive_output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to receive an event from the application:

.. code-block:: python

    event = await communicator.receive_output(timeout=1)
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.start"

.. _application_communicator-receive_nothing:

receive_nothing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Call it to check that there is no event waiting to be received from the
application:

.. code-block:: python

    assert await communicator.receive_nothing(timeout=0.1, interval=0.01) is False
    # Receive the rest of the http request from above
    event = await communicator.receive_output()
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.body"
    assert event.get("more_body") is True
    event = await communicator.receive_output()
    assert event["type"] == "http.response.body"
    assert event.get("more_body") is None
    # Check that there isn't another event
    assert await communicator.receive_nothing() is True
    # You could continue to send and receive events
    # await communicator.send_input(...)

The method has two optional parameters:

* ``timeout``: number of seconds to wait to ensure the queue is empty. Defaults
  to 0.1.
* ``interval``: number of seconds to wait for another check for new events.
  Defaults to 0.01.

wait
~~~~

Call it to wait for an application to exit (you'll need to either do this or wait for
it to send you output before you can see what it did using mocks or inspection):

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.wait(timeout=1)

If you're expecting your application to raise an exception, use ``pytest.raises``
around ``wait``:

.. code-block:: python

    with pytest.raises(ValueError):
        await communicator.wait()


HttpCommunicator
----------------

``HttpCommunicator`` is a subclass of ``ApplicationCommunicator`` specifically
tailored for HTTP requests. You need only instantiate it with your desired
options:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import HttpCommunicator
    communicator = HttpCommunicator(MyHttpConsumer.as_asgi(), "GET", "/test/")

And then wait for its response:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.get_response()
    assert response["body"] == b"test response"

You can pass the following arguments to the constructor:

* ``method``: HTTP method name (unicode string, required)
* ``path``: HTTP path (unicode string, required)
* ``body``: HTTP body (bytestring, optional)

The response from the ``get_response`` method will be a dict with the following
keys:

* ``status``: HTTP status code (integer)
* ``headers``: List of headers as (name, value) tuples (both bytestrings)
* ``body``: HTTP response body (bytestring)


WebsocketCommunicator
---------------------

``WebsocketCommunicator`` allows you to more easily test WebSocket consumers.
It provides several convenience methods for interacting with a WebSocket
application, as shown in this example:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import WebsocketCommunicator
    communicator = WebsocketCommunicator(SimpleWebsocketApp.as_asgi(), "/testws/")
    connected, subprotocol = await communicator.connect()
    assert connected
    # Test sending text
    await communicator.send_to(text_data="hello")
    response = await communicator.receive_from()
    assert response == "hello"
    # Close
    await communicator.disconnect()

.. note::

    All of these methods are coroutines, which means you must ``await`` them.
    If you do not, your test will either time out (if you forgot to await a
    send) or try comparing things to a coroutine object (if you forgot to
    await a receive).

.. important::

    If you don't call ``WebsocketCommunicator.disconnect()`` before your test
    suite ends, you may find yourself getting ``RuntimeWarnings`` about
    things never being awaited, as you will be killing your app off in the
    middle of its lifecycle. You do not, however, have to ``disconnect()`` if
    your app already raised an error.

You can also pass an ``application`` built with ``URLRouter`` instead of the
plain consumer class. This lets you test applications that require positional
or keyword arguments in the ``scope``:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import WebsocketCommunicator
    application = URLRouter([
        path("testws/<message>/", KwargsWebSocketApp.as_asgi()),
    ])
    communicator = WebsocketCommunicator(application, "/testws/test/")
    connected, subprotocol = await communicator.connect()
    assert connected
    # Test on connection welcome message
    message = await communicator.receive_from()
    assert message == 'test'
    # Close
    await communicator.disconnect()

.. note::

    Since the ``WebsocketCommunicator`` class takes a URL in its constructor,
    a single Communicator can only test a single URL. If you want to test
    multiple different URLs, use multiple Communicators.

connect
~~~~~~~

Triggers the connection phase of the WebSocket and waits for the application
to either accept or deny the connection. Takes no parameters and returns
either:

* ``(True, <chosen_subprotocol>)`` if the socket was accepted.
  ``chosen_subprotocol`` defaults to ``None``.
* ``(False, <close_code>)`` if the socket was rejected.
  ``close_code`` defaults to ``1000``.

send_to
~~~~~~~

Sends a data frame to the application. Takes exactly one of ``bytes_data``
or ``text_data`` as parameters, and returns nothing:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_to(bytes_data=b"hi\0")

This method will type-check your parameters for you to ensure what you are
sending really is text or bytes.

send_json_to
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sends a JSON payload to the application as a text frame. Call it with
an object and it will JSON-encode it for you, and return nothing:

.. code-block:: python

    await communicator.send_json_to({"hello": "world"})

receive_from
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Receives a frame from the application and gives you either ``bytes`` or
``text`` back depending on the frame type:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.receive_from()

Takes an optional ``timeout`` argument with a number of seconds to wait before
timing out, which defaults to 1. It will typecheck your application's responses
for you as well, to ensure that text frames contain text data, and binary
frames contain binary data.

receive_json_from
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Receives a text frame from the application and decodes it for you:

.. code-block:: python

    response = await communicator.receive_json_from()
    assert response == {"hello": "world"}

Takes an optional ``timeout`` argument with a number of seconds to wait before
timing out, which defaults to 1.

receive_nothing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Checks that there is no frame waiting to be received from the application. For
details see
:ref:`ApplicationCommunicator <application_communicator-receive_nothing>`.

disconnect
~~~~~~~~~~

Closes the socket from the client side. Takes nothing and returns nothing.

You do not need to call this if the application instance you're testing already
exited (for example, if it errored), but if you do call it, it will just
silently return control to you.


ChannelsLiveServerTestCase
--------------------------

If you just want to run standard Selenium or other tests that require a
webserver to be running for external programs, you can use
``ChannelsLiveServerTestCase``, which is a drop-in replacement for the
standard Django ``LiveServerTestCase``:

.. code-block:: python

    from channels.testing import ChannelsLiveServerTestCase

    class SomeLiveTests(ChannelsLiveServerTestCase):

        def test_live_stuff(self):
            call_external_testing_thing(self.live_server_url)

.. note::

    You can't use an in-memory database for your live tests. Therefore
    include a test database file name in your settings to tell Django to
    use a file database if you use SQLite:

    .. code-block:: python

        DATABASES = {
            "default": {
                "ENGINE": "django.db.backends.sqlite3",
                "NAME": os.path.join(BASE_DIR, "db.sqlite3"),
                "TEST": {
                    "NAME": os.path.join(BASE_DIR, "db_test.sqlite3"),
                },
            },
        }

serve_static
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Subclass ``ChannelsLiveServerTestCase`` with ``serve_static = True`` in order
to serve static files (comparable to Django's ``StaticLiveServerTestCase``, you
don't need to run collectstatic before or as a part of your tests setup).
