docs/backends.rst, before:

Backends
========

Multiple choices of backend are available, to fill different tradeoffs of
complexity, throughput and scalability. You can also write your own backend if
you wish; the API is very simple and documented below.

In-memory
---------

Database
--------

Redis
-----

Writing Custom Backends
-----------------------

Backend Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the channel backends are pluggable, there's a minimum standard they
must meet in terms of the way they perform.

In particular, a channel backend MUST:

* Provide a ``send()`` method which sends a message onto a named channel

* Provide a ``receive_many()`` method which returns an available message on the
  provided channels, or returns no message either instantly or after a short
  delay (it must not block indefinitely)

* Provide a ``group_add()`` method which adds a channel to a named group
  for at least the provided expiry period.

* Provide a ``group_discard()`` method with removes a channel from a named
  group if it was added, and nothing otherwise.

* Provide a ``group_members()`` method which returns an iterable of all
  channels currently in the group.

* Preserve the ordering of messages inside a channel

* Never deliver a message more than once (design for at-most-once delivery)

* Never block on sending of a message (dropping the message/erroring is preferable to blocking)

* Be able to store messages of at least 5MB in size

* Allow for channel and group names of up to 200 printable ASCII characters

* Expire messages only after the expiry period provided is up (a backend may
  keep them longer if it wishes, but should expire them at some reasonable
  point to ensure users do not come to rely on permanent messages)

In addition, it SHOULD:

* Provide a ``receive_many_blocking()`` method which is like ``receive_many()``
  but blocks until a message is available.

* Provide a ``send_group()`` method which sends a message to every channel
  in a group.

* Make ``send_group()`` perform better than ``O(n)``, where ``n`` is the
  number of members in the group; preferably send the messages to all
  members in a single call to your backing datastore or protocol.

* Try and preserve a rough global ordering, so that one busy channel does not
  drown out an old message in another channel if a worker is listening on both.

Commit message:

Add a bit of in-memory docs

docs/backends.rst, after:

Backends
========

Multiple choices of backend are available, to fill different tradeoffs of
complexity, throughput and scalability. You can also write your own backend if
you wish; the API is very simple and documented below.

In-memory
---------

The in-memory backend is the simplest, and not really a backend as such;
it exists purely to enable Django to run in a "normal" mode where no Channels
functionality is available, just normal HTTP request processing. You should
never need to set it explicitly.

This backend provides no network transparency or non-blocking guarantees.

Database
--------

Redis
-----

Writing Custom Backends
-----------------------

Backend Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While the channel backends are pluggable, there's a minimum standard they
must meet in terms of the way they perform.

In particular, a channel backend MUST:

* Provide a ``send()`` method which sends a message onto a named channel

* Provide a ``receive_many()`` method which returns an available message on the
  provided channels, or returns no message either instantly or after a short
  delay (it must not block indefinitely)

* Provide a ``group_add()`` method which adds a channel to a named group
  for at least the provided expiry period.

* Provide a ``group_discard()`` method with removes a channel from a named
  group if it was added, and nothing otherwise.

* Provide a ``group_members()`` method which returns an iterable of all
  channels currently in the group.

* Preserve the ordering of messages inside a channel

* Never deliver a message more than once (design for at-most-once delivery)

* Never block on sending of a message (dropping the message/erroring is preferable to blocking)

* Be able to store messages of at least 5MB in size

* Allow for channel and group names of up to 200 printable ASCII characters

* Expire messages only after the expiry period provided is up (a backend may
  keep them longer if it wishes, but should expire them at some reasonable
  point to ensure users do not come to rely on permanent messages)

In addition, it SHOULD:

* Provide a ``receive_many_blocking()`` method which is like ``receive_many()``
  but blocks until a message is available.

* Provide a ``send_group()`` method which sends a message to every channel
  in a group.

* Make ``send_group()`` perform better than ``O(n)``, where ``n`` is the
  number of members in the group; preferably send the messages to all
  members in a single call to your backing datastore or protocol.

* Try and preserve a rough global ordering, so that one busy channel does not
  drown out an old message in another channel if a worker is listening on both.
