docs/index.rst, before:

Django Channels
===============

Channels is a project that takes Django and extends its abilities beyond
HTTP - to handle WebSockets, chat protocols, IoT protocols, and more.

It does this by taking the core of Django and layering a fully asynchronous
layer underneath, running Django itself in a synchronous mode but handling
connections and sockets asynchronously, and giving you the choice to write
in either style.

To get started understanding how Channels works, read our :doc:`introduction`,
which will walk through how things work. If you're upgrading from Channels 1,
take a look at :doc:`one-to-two` to get an overview of the changes; things
are substantially different.

.. warning::
   This is documentation for the **2.x series** of Channels. If you are looking
   for documentation for the legacy Channels 1, you can select ``1.x`` from the
   versions selector in the bottom-left corner.


Projects
--------

Channels is comprised of several packages:

* `Channels <https://github.com/django/channels/>`_, the Django integration layer
* `Daphne <https://github.com/django/daphne/>`_, the HTTP and Websocket termination server
* `asgiref <https://github.com/django/asgiref/>`_, the base ASGI library
* `channels_redis <https://github.com/django/channels_redis/>`_, the Redis channel layer backend (optional)

This documentation covers the system as a whole; individual release notes and
instructions can be found in the individual repositories.


Topics
------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   introduction
   installation
   topics/consumers
   topics/routing
   topics/databases
   topics/channel_layers
   topics/sessions
   topics/authentication
   topics/security
   topics/testing
   topics/worker
   deploying
   one-to-two
   javascript


Reference
---------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   asgi
   channel_layer_spec
   community
   contributing
   releases/index

Commit message:

Add examples repo to main page

docs/index.rst, after:

Django Channels
===============

Channels is a project that takes Django and extends its abilities beyond
HTTP - to handle WebSockets, chat protocols, IoT protocols, and more.

It does this by taking the core of Django and layering a fully asynchronous
layer underneath, running Django itself in a synchronous mode but handling
connections and sockets asynchronously, and giving you the choice to write
in either style.

To get started understanding how Channels works, read our :doc:`introduction`,
which will walk through how things work. If you're upgrading from Channels 1,
take a look at :doc:`one-to-two` to get an overview of the changes; things
are substantially different.

If you would like complete code examples to read alongside the documentation
or experiment on, the `channels-examples <https://github.com/andrewgodwin/channels-examples/>`_
repository contains well-commented example Channels projects.

.. warning::
   This is documentation for the **2.x series** of Channels. If you are looking
   for documentation for the legacy Channels 1, you can select ``1.x`` from the
   versions selector in the bottom-left corner.


Projects
--------

Channels is comprised of several packages:

* `Channels <https://github.com/django/channels/>`_, the Django integration layer
* `Daphne <https://github.com/django/daphne/>`_, the HTTP and Websocket termination server
* `asgiref <https://github.com/django/asgiref/>`_, the base ASGI library
* `channels_redis <https://github.com/django/channels_redis/>`_, the Redis channel layer backend (optional)

This documentation covers the system as a whole; individual release notes and
instructions can be found in the individual repositories.


Topics
------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   introduction
   installation
   topics/consumers
   topics/routing
   topics/databases
   topics/channel_layers
   topics/sessions
   topics/authentication
   topics/security
   topics/testing
   topics/worker
   deploying
   one-to-two
   javascript


Reference
---------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   asgi
   channel_layer_spec
   community
   contributing
   releases/index
