docs/reference.rst, before:

Reference
=========

.. _ref-consumers:

Consumers
---------

When you configure channel routing, the object assigned to a channel
should be a callable that takes exactly one positional argument, here
called ``message``, which is a :ref:`message object <ref-message>`. A consumer
is any callable that fits this definition.

Consumers are not expected to return anything, and if they do, it will be
ignored. They may raise ``channels.exceptions.ConsumeLater`` to re-insert
their current message at the back of the channel it was on, but be aware you
can only do this so many time (10 by default) until the message is dropped
to avoid deadlocking.


.. _ref-message:

Message
-------

Message objects are what consumers get passed as their only argument. They
encapsulate the basic :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` message, which is a ``dict``, with
extra information. They have the following attributes:

* ``content``: The actual message content, as a dict. See the
  :doc:`ASGI spec <asgi>` or protocol message definition document for how this
  is structured.

* ``channel``: A :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object, representing the channel
  this message was received on. Useful if one consumer handles multiple channels.

* ``reply_channel``: A :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object, representing the
  unique reply channel for this message, or ``None`` if there isn't one.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer this was received on. This can be
  useful in projects that have more than one layer to identify where to send
  messages the consumer generates (you can pass it to the constructor of
  :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` or :ref:`Group <ref-group>`)


.. _ref-channel:

Channel
-------

Channel objects are a simple abstraction around ASGI channels, which by default
are unicode strings. The constructor looks like this::

    channels.Channel(name, alias=DEFAULT_CHANNEL_LAYER, channel_layer=None)

Normally, you'll just call ``Channel("my.channel.name")`` and it'll make the
right thing, but if you're in a project with multiple channel layers set up,
you can pass in either the layer alias or the layer object and it'll send
onto that one instead. They have the following attributes:

* ``name``: The unicode string representing the channel name.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer to send messages on.

* ``send(content)``: Sends the ``dict`` provided as *content* over the channel.
  The content should conform to the relevant ASGI spec or protocol definition.


.. _ref-group:

Group
-----

Groups represent the underlying :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` group concept in an
object-oriented way. The constructor looks like this::

    channels.Group(name, alias=DEFAULT_CHANNEL_LAYER, channel_layer=None)

Like :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>`, you would usually just pass a ``name``, but
can pass a layer alias or object if you want to send on a non-default one.
They have the following attributes:

* ``name``: The unicode string representing the group name.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer to send messages on.

* ``send(content)``: Sends the ``dict`` provided as *content* to all
  members of the group.

* ``add(channel)``: Adds the given channel (as either a :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>`
  object or a unicode string name) to the group. If the channel is already in
  the group, does nothing.

* ``discard(channel)``: Removes the given channel (as either a
  :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object or a unicode string name) from the group,
  if it's in the group. Does nothing otherwise.


.. _ref-channellayer:

Channel Layer
-------------

These are a wrapper around the underlying :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` channel layers
that supplies a routing system that maps channels to consumers, as well as
aliases to help distinguish different layers in a project with multiple layers.

You shouldn't make these directly; instead, get them by alias (``default`` is
the default alias)::

    from channels import channel_layers
    layer = channel_layers["default"]

They have the following attributes:

* ``alias``: The alias of this layer.

* ``router``: An object which represents the layer's mapping of channels
  to consumers. Has the following attributes:

  * ``channels``: The set of channels this router can handle, as unicode strings

  * ``match(message)``: Takes a :ref:`Message <ref-message>` and returns either
    a (consumer, kwargs) tuple specifying the consumer to run and the keyword
    argument to pass that were extracted via routing patterns, or None,
    meaning there's no route available.


.. _ref-asgirequest:

AsgiRequest
-----------

This is a subclass of ``django.http.HttpRequest`` that provides decoding from
ASGI requests, and a few extra methods for ASGI-specific info. The constructor is::

    channels.handler.AsgiRequest(message)

``message`` must be an :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` ``http.request`` format message.

Additional attributes are:

* ``reply_channel``, a :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object that represents the
  ``http.response.?`` reply channel for this request.

* ``message``, the raw ASGI message passed in the constructor.


.. _ref-asgihandler:

AsgiHandler
-----------

This is a class in ``channels.handler`` that's designed to handle the workflow
of HTTP requests via ASGI messages. You likely don't need to interact with it
directly, but there are two useful ways you can call it:

* ``AsgiHandler(message)`` will process the message through the Django view
  layer and yield one or more response messages to send back to the client,
  encoded from the Django ``HttpResponse``.

* ``encode_response(response)`` is a classmethod that can be called with a
  Django ``HttpResponse`` and will yield one or more ASGI messages that are
  the encoded response.


.. _ref-decorators:

Decorators
----------

Channels provides decorators to assist with persisting data.

* ``channel_session``: Provides a session-like object called "channel_session" to consumers
    as a message attribute that will auto-persist across consumers with
    the same incoming "reply_channel" value.

    Use this to persist data across the lifetime of a connection.

* ``http_session``: Wraps a HTTP or WebSocket connect consumer (or any consumer of messages
    that provides a "cookies" or "get" attribute) to provide a "http_session"
    attribute that behaves like request.session; that is, it's hung off of
    a per-user session key that is saved in a cookie or passed as the
    "session_key" GET parameter.

    It won't automatically create and set a session cookie for users who
    don't have one - that's what SessionMiddleware is for, this is a simpler
    read-only version for more low-level code.

    If a message does not have a session we can inflate, the "session" attribute
    will be None, rather than an empty session you can write to.

    Does not allow a new session to be set; that must be done via a view. This
    is only an accessor for any existing session.

* ``channel_and_http_session``: Enables both the channel_session and http_session.

    Stores the http session key in the channel_session on websocket.connect messages.
    It will then hydrate the http_session from that same key on subsequent messages.

Commit message:

Added a decorator that checks origin headers (#593)
Adds a new allowed_hosts_only decorator and extensible base class to allow for checking the incoming Origin header on WebSocket requests, using the Django `ALLOWED_HOSTS` setting by default.

docs/reference.rst, after:

Reference
=========

.. _ref-consumers:

Consumers
---------

When you configure channel routing, the object assigned to a channel
should be a callable that takes exactly one positional argument, here
called ``message``, which is a :ref:`message object <ref-message>`. A consumer
is any callable that fits this definition.

Consumers are not expected to return anything, and if they do, it will be
ignored. They may raise ``channels.exceptions.ConsumeLater`` to re-insert
their current message at the back of the channel it was on, but be aware you
can only do this so many time (10 by default) until the message is dropped
to avoid deadlocking.


.. _ref-message:

Message
-------

Message objects are what consumers get passed as their only argument. They
encapsulate the basic :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` message, which is a ``dict``, with
extra information. They have the following attributes:

* ``content``: The actual message content, as a dict. See the
  :doc:`ASGI spec <asgi>` or protocol message definition document for how this
  is structured.

* ``channel``: A :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object, representing the channel
  this message was received on. Useful if one consumer handles multiple channels.

* ``reply_channel``: A :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object, representing the
  unique reply channel for this message, or ``None`` if there isn't one.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer this was received on. This can be
  useful in projects that have more than one layer to identify where to send
  messages the consumer generates (you can pass it to the constructor of
  :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` or :ref:`Group <ref-group>`)


.. _ref-channel:

Channel
-------

Channel objects are a simple abstraction around ASGI channels, which by default
are unicode strings. The constructor looks like this::

    channels.Channel(name, alias=DEFAULT_CHANNEL_LAYER, channel_layer=None)

Normally, you'll just call ``Channel("my.channel.name")`` and it'll make the
right thing, but if you're in a project with multiple channel layers set up,
you can pass in either the layer alias or the layer object and it'll send
onto that one instead. They have the following attributes:

* ``name``: The unicode string representing the channel name.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer to send messages on.

* ``send(content)``: Sends the ``dict`` provided as *content* over the channel.
  The content should conform to the relevant ASGI spec or protocol definition.


.. _ref-group:

Group
-----

Groups represent the underlying :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` group concept in an
object-oriented way. The constructor looks like this::

    channels.Group(name, alias=DEFAULT_CHANNEL_LAYER, channel_layer=None)

Like :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>`, you would usually just pass a ``name``, but
can pass a layer alias or object if you want to send on a non-default one.
They have the following attributes:

* ``name``: The unicode string representing the group name.

* ``channel_layer``: A :ref:`ChannelLayer <ref-channellayer>` object,
  representing the underlying channel layer to send messages on.

* ``send(content)``: Sends the ``dict`` provided as *content* to all
  members of the group.

* ``add(channel)``: Adds the given channel (as either a :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>`
  object or a unicode string name) to the group. If the channel is already in
  the group, does nothing.

* ``discard(channel)``: Removes the given channel (as either a
  :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object or a unicode string name) from the group,
  if it's in the group. Does nothing otherwise.


.. _ref-channellayer:

Channel Layer
-------------

These are a wrapper around the underlying :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` channel layers
that supplies a routing system that maps channels to consumers, as well as
aliases to help distinguish different layers in a project with multiple layers.

You shouldn't make these directly; instead, get them by alias (``default`` is
the default alias)::

    from channels import channel_layers
    layer = channel_layers["default"]

They have the following attributes:

* ``alias``: The alias of this layer.

* ``router``: An object which represents the layer's mapping of channels
  to consumers. Has the following attributes:

  * ``channels``: The set of channels this router can handle, as unicode strings

  * ``match(message)``: Takes a :ref:`Message <ref-message>` and returns either
    a (consumer, kwargs) tuple specifying the consumer to run and the keyword
    argument to pass that were extracted via routing patterns, or None,
    meaning there's no route available.


.. _ref-asgirequest:

AsgiRequest
-----------

This is a subclass of ``django.http.HttpRequest`` that provides decoding from
ASGI requests, and a few extra methods for ASGI-specific info. The constructor is::

    channels.handler.AsgiRequest(message)

``message`` must be an :doc:`ASGI <asgi>` ``http.request`` format message.

Additional attributes are:

* ``reply_channel``, a :ref:`Channel <ref-channel>` object that represents the
  ``http.response.?`` reply channel for this request.

* ``message``, the raw ASGI message passed in the constructor.


.. _ref-asgihandler:

AsgiHandler
-----------

This is a class in ``channels.handler`` that's designed to handle the workflow
of HTTP requests via ASGI messages. You likely don't need to interact with it
directly, but there are two useful ways you can call it:

* ``AsgiHandler(message)`` will process the message through the Django view
  layer and yield one or more response messages to send back to the client,
  encoded from the Django ``HttpResponse``.

* ``encode_response(response)`` is a classmethod that can be called with a
  Django ``HttpResponse`` and will yield one or more ASGI messages that are
  the encoded response.


.. _ref-decorators:

Decorators
----------

Channels provides decorators to assist with persisting data and security.

* ``channel_session``: Provides a session-like object called "channel_session" to consumers
    as a message attribute that will auto-persist across consumers with
    the same incoming "reply_channel" value.

    Use this to persist data across the lifetime of a connection.

* ``http_session``: Wraps a HTTP or WebSocket connect consumer (or any consumer of messages
    that provides a "cookies" or "get" attribute) to provide a "http_session"
    attribute that behaves like request.session; that is, it's hung off of
    a per-user session key that is saved in a cookie or passed as the
    "session_key" GET parameter.

    It won't automatically create and set a session cookie for users who
    don't have one - that's what SessionMiddleware is for, this is a simpler
    read-only version for more low-level code.

    If a message does not have a session we can inflate, the "session" attribute
    will be None, rather than an empty session you can write to.

    Does not allow a new session to be set; that must be done via a view. This
    is only an accessor for any existing session.

* ``channel_and_http_session``: Enables both the channel_session and http_session.

    Stores the http session key in the channel_session on websocket.connect messages.
    It will then hydrate the http_session from that same key on subsequent messages.

* ``allowed_hosts_only``: Wraps a WebSocket connect consumer and ensures the
    request originates from an allowed host.

    Reads the Origin header and only passes request originating from a host
    listed in ``ALLOWED_HOSTS`` to the consumer. Requests from other hosts or
    with a missing or invalid Origin headers are rejected.
